# Preface
As I embarked on the world of Virtualization, I realized that there is so much to know, as well as so little you need to know, to make Virtualization useful for you. At the outset one considers Virtualization as the ability to run an //additional// Operating System on you current physical machine/laptop. I started off the same way because I needed to quickly Virtualize a Linux server on my Work Desktop to get some things moving for what I was required to do. I started with VMware player and I realized it required a license (Vmware player plus) to use it in a commercial environment. So I looked for something similar/free, as all I wanted to do was get a server up and running quickly and I did not want to spend time and effort getting a license procured. Even if the cost is low, any procurement goes through a long cycle in most organizations and time was of the essence. I embarked on VirtualBox as it's free, does what I need. VB helped me achieve my goal of getting that server going that same afternoon. And unlike VMware player which is a basic apparatus for Virtualization, VirtualBox let's you do the basic as well as used Advanced Virtualization features. I was intrigued and started digging deeper.

I run my own server at home on physical machines and I recognized I need to move them to Virtualized servers. Every few years I go through a hardware upgrade and have a tedious and meticulous task to migrate //all// of my implementation in one sweep. I knew instantly that I would benefit from Virtualizing wherein I would now have segregated my architecture into many more individual and independent components (using VMs) and would migrate each one independently as required and in a time-frame that works better for me. Hardware migration would be a simple copy of the VM to the new system. As a user running my own server in my home, I am very critical about space, power consumption, time and effort to maintain my server, etc. All of these considerations are manageable with VMs without sacrificing the infrastructure design by loading everything in one huge all-in-one server. When I embarked on the endeavor to make this home brew infrastructure better, I did what I always do - dig deeper into the technology. And as I looked deeper I only found interesting and good things both about Virtualization and VirtualBox. I wanted to be confident that the technology and tools will get me where I need to be and not leave me out there hanging. This is a server at my home, but it is a //real// **production** server, serving several email gateways, literally a hundred websites (yes all my friends host with me for free), several applications including a Minecraft game server that my kid and his friends join to play. This is a real server doing real work with a 7x24 up-time requirement. If I make the move towards Virtualizing it, I better be sure.

As I started reading and experimenting more with Virtualization with emphasis on VirtualBox, I got more excited every step of the way. Somewhere down the line I realized that I need to write this book. Mostly that realization came about because there was not a comprehensive and practical outline of the Technology and Tools. There was a lot of information on the topic but nothing coerced together in a way that will educate someone starting from scratch to making him or her a real Virtualization Administrator. I went to becoming an expert and I wanted to have everyone go through that transition if they so desire in the simplest way. My own transition has not been easy - I had to spend countless days experimenting between what works and what does not. Most commercial outlets use a lot of commercial software that does not fit well into what I am trying to achieve - a free enterprise solution. I needed a robust, standardized process that I am convinced will work as well as in a commercial environment. I also needed something I can automate so it does not take away my time. With all of that considerations I wrote myself a manual that I can follow and be successful. That manual is now this book and of course I had to go through an enormous translation from "My personal notes" to something that "Everyone can appreciate and find useful". A book born out of my own desire to document my learning of VirtualBox is now elaborated to help others with similar desire. I realized that most discussions (online) were limited to use of simple GUI functions of VB and very limited use of the more advanced features. Also, VB has evolved significantly over the years, as has the rest of Virtualization technology. This left much of the online discussions outdated or sometimes inaccurate. I also found a lot of misconceptions about Virtualizations and VirtualBox which I will help to uncover in this book.

The book is presented in a way that is practical, easy to follow and can be applied directly to the real world. The book avoids as much as possible, any repetitiousness and the goal is to present the material as crisp as possible. Ideally, whether the reader is a beginner or an expert, there is a ton of information packed in this book that makes the book practical. There is custom source code of scripts that can be used as-is to Create and Maintain Virtualization using VB.

I have been running my own Web, Email, Application server at my home for almost a decade now. All along I have used physical machines and have finally decided take the plunge into Virtualizing them - and I am quite glad I did. While there is some upfront work and understanding, once things are established it keeps the maintenance and long-term operations easy. By use of this book I am hoping your own Virtualization needs are met that much faster. This book will quite easily save you 100's of hours of work understanding, experimenting and deciding on a right approach on Virtualization. It will not only help you become an expert on a new technology / tool, but also let you have a stable foundation to work with and expand your career in Virtualization should you decide to take your knowledge in that direction.


### What is covered?
The book covers use of VB under the Debian based Host and Guest operating systems. All scripts and examples are based on and tested with Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty Tahr). Most of these are readily transferable to other Linux Host and Guest OS. There may be a few things to consider doing different for Windows OS and Mac OS. The emphasis for this book is to have the VirtualBox server running on command-line and hence easily maintainable remotely without the need for GUI, although you may use the GUI as well. The Guest OS can be GUI (if that is what you require to Virtualize) as VB provides a Remote Desktop Feature for GUI Guests. Most everything in this book is command based management. The GUI is not described here as it is essentially quite straight forward to understand and also the GUI offers a very small subset of VB features. The real power to using and maintaining Virtualization lies in the command-line. If you need more power, you will have to switch to VB API and the book covers an outline of the VB API as well. So in essence, the book is NOT filled with pages and pages of screen-shots, rather a set of command options and scripts that can be readily used to maintain a Virtualized Infrastructure. You will have script templates to create, clone, backup and manage with automation several VB functions.

### How is this book written?
A lot of thought went into simplifying the reasoning and explanations to what is the absolutely ideal amount of detail that a technology enthusiasts would appreciate and be willing to digest. The ideas presented and procedures presented have been well tested and are implementation ready. The goal was to avoid the need to refer additional material except where the reader is compelled to dig much deeper.

With that said, you will find bullet lists spread all around the pages. It was an art to condense explanations where possible to simple bullets which would have otherwise run into pages and pages of rambling. The book //does// expect you to have some Administrative background to appreciate the concise nature of the book. This approach also turns the book into a very effective reference book. For those specific cases requiring advanced features you will need to refer to the manual for //syntax//. However, the books aims to help you understand what features exists so you know to look for the specific details in the manual, should a need arise. I have been careful to avoid extreme levels of details from the manual pasted back in the book as they will only serve to overload your understanding with almost zero retention of the specifics you were reading.

What you also won't see in this book are chapters filled with screen-shots or extended graphics that have little benefit. You will see script listings that will be made available for download. Refer to link at the end of the book for location of the scripts. The scripts are provided to be run as-is or to modify as desired. If you are in a rush and need to get moving as quickly as you can just run them as they come, or you can modify them to your specific requirements and for a wider understanding. The suggested learning approach is to initially run them one command at a time, so you understand and observe each step more closely.

### Why Focus on Command Line?
Most all books (and blogs) that I came across seem to linger around GUI operation of VB. VirtualBox provides multiple ways to manage Virtual Machines. The most popular is of course the use of GUI Client. The GUI client presents an intuitive user friendly way to manage VirtualBox VMs. It is most suitable for those who are just getting started with Virtualization in general or VirtualBox in particular. This is probably the best approach if all you require is a relatively small set of VMs that you plan to run on your laptop. However, if you either plan on Virtualizing your entire data center or more than just a few servers, it is well invested to use nothing but "headless" mode for Virtualization. Scripting/Command-line will allow you to clone VMs with just few short key strokes and even automated maintenance and documentation of the VMs. In technology terms, scripting is easily scalable to manage your environment as opposed to GUI. Once you get familiar with scripting there is no end to using all available possibilities. Also the newest features are implemented as command-line mode first before they get implemented on the GUI. Really and truly, the GUI is a very small subset of available options and commands.

The goal of this book is to reduce the learning curve associated with using command-line and delve deep into the advanced options for both Virtualization and VirtualBox. Even seasoned admins can get frustrated when learning a new tool. VirtualBox comes with a good set of commands that help you effectively manage your Virtual Machines. With such a rich set of options comes a learning curve and ample opportunities for mistakes. Mistakes, trials and errors can get quite frustrating and the goal is to avoid that frustration and make the experience of using VB pleasurable. The VB manual does a great job of listing every possible option without regard to what is most critical. The VB manual also (rightfully) stops with identifying just what is required for VB to operate and does not delve into Standards, OS Commands, Concepts, etc. This book should hopefully get you going an order of magnitude faster when learning VirtualBox implementation and maintenance via command-line. It goes into some of the details where the VB manual stops. The book presents best practices to be followed, Core VB and underlying OS concepts and commands, exposes misconceptions, presents scripts to automate key tasks, etc. to name a few. Once you start Virtualizing you will find yourself consumed with juggling around so many Virtual instances you will be thankful to be forewarned and guided to managing all of the instances effectively, as each one of them needs to be documented, backed up, integrated, etc.

### How about Web/API interface?
Next to command line, is the Web interface to VirtualBox. VirtualBox has a set of API to control VMs. These can be used to manage the VMs via a Web client. The advantage of a Web client over GUI is the lack of a need to install and maintain a heavy client on the host. Installing thick client on the host means you will also need to install an operating system (or OS feature) which has a graphic interface. This makes the host much "heavier" and "complicated" than required. If you are doing all of this in a data center, most likely the hosts are themselves remote servers. In that case command-line or web access provides the easiest way to get to the host as opposed to the overly chatty X11 based GUI, for example. The Web client is nice and gives you the status at a glance and/or to make ad-hoc and quick adjustments to the VMs. However when you need to automate changes (such as regularly scheduled snapshots) the command-line offers flexibility and automation.

### Pure scripting API interface
Unlimited power and potential can be had with using a scripting language (such as Python) with VB API. The API provides features not available in command-line and provides the next level of automation and sophistication. The book does touch upon API but does not go into the depth of using API. Perhaps the next edition of the book might do that.

### What operating systems are covered?
The book relies on Installing VirtualBox on Ubuntu Linux Trusty Tahr. I have worked with VB on other versions of Ubuntu as well as other operating systems. Certain specifics on each operating system are touched upon but mostly the discussion and scripts are complete for Ubuntu.

### What else is covered?
The book also goes briefly into some history and the different virutalization options available with explanation. It helps to understand where you stand in the world of Virtualization. It also helps you to position VirtualBox as a viable solution once you understand how the rest of this realm works, otherwise you would be hard-pressed to recommend one over the other. You will encounter folks throwing statements such as "Type 1 is the way to go when it comes to Hypervisors", or "Nothing beats KVM since is has Kernel level Virtualization", to name a few. Most of these claims have no true validity when it comes to deciding how to Virtualize.

### Feedback Appreciated
As most authors would, I love to hear from my readers and will take the time to answer questions. Willing to take suggestions to improve the next edition of the book. Look for contact link at the end of the book on how to reach me.
