# Preface
As I embarked on the world of Virtualization, I realized that there is so much to know, as well as so little you need to know, to make Virtualization useful for you.  People consider Virtualization as the ability to run an _additional_ Operating System on you current physical machine or laptop.  I started off the same way because I needed to Virtualize a Linux server on my work desktop to get things moving for what I was required to do.  I started with VMware player and I realized it required a license (Vmware player plus) to use it in a commercial environment.  I looked for something similar/free, as all I wanted to do was get a server up and running and I did not want to spend time and effort getting a license procured.  I embarked on VirtualBox as it's free, does what I need. VB helped me achieve my goal of getting that server going that same afternoon.

Unlike VMware Player which is a basic apparatus for Virtualization, VirtualBox let's you do the basic and includes advanced Virtualization features all for free. This intrigued me and I started digging deeper.

I run my own server at home on physical machines and I recognized I need to move them to Virtualized servers.  Every few years I go through a hardware upgrade and have a tedious and meticulous task to migrate my entire implementation in one sweep.  Virtualizing would simplify this as I would segregate my architecture into individual and independent components (using VMs). I would then be able to migrate each one independently as required and in a time-frame that works better for me.

Hardware migration would be a simple copy of the VM to the new system. As a user running my own server in my home, I
am critical about space, power consumption, time and effort to maintain my server, etc. These considerations are manageable with VMs. Virtualization preserves the infrastructure design without loading everything in one huge all-in-one server. 

When I embarked on the task of making this home brew infrastructure better, I did what I always do - dig deeper into the technology. And as I researched I found many interesting and good things both about Virtualization and VirtualBox.  I wanted to be confident that the technology and tools would get me where I need to be and not leave me out there hanging.

The server at my home is a real production server, serving several email gateways, a hundred websites (yes all my friends host with me for free), and several applications including a Minecraft game server that my kid and his friends join to play. This is a real server doing real work with a 7x24 up-time requirement. If I make the move towards Virtualizing it, I better be sure.

As I started reading and experimenting more with Virtualization with emphasis on VirtualBox, I got more excited every step of the way. During this process I realized that I need to write this book. That realization came about because there was not a comprehensive and practical outline of the technology and tools. There was a lot of information on the topic spread all over the web, but no one source that educates someone starting from scratch and educating them to become a competent Virtualization Administrator.  The discussions (online) were limited to use of simple GUI functions of VB and limited use of the more advanced features. Also, VB has evolved significantly over the years, as has the rest of virtualization technology. This left much of the online discussions outdated or sometimes inaccurate. I also found a lot of misconceptions about Virtualizations and VirtualBox which I will help to uncover in this book.

I became an expert and wanted others to have the ability to go through that transition in a more simplified manner. My own transition has not been easy - I had to spend countless days experimenting between what works and what does not. 

This standardization and solution that I am presenting in the book has of course been already achieved in the commercial space. But I am not looking to buy expensive software for my home servers.  I needed the power of virtualization without the need to procure expensive software. Also, I probably don't need to level of sophistication that is offered at that price range. I needed simple, working, maintainable and free.  I also needed something I can automate so it does not take away my time. With these considerations I wrote myself a manual that I can follow and be successful.  That manual is now this book and of course I had to go through an enormous translation from "My personal notes" to something that "Everyone can appreciate and find useful." A book born out of my own desire to document my learning of VirtualBox is now elaborated to help others with similar desire.

The book is presented in a way that is practical, easy to follow and can be applied directly to the real world. The book avoids as much as possible, any repetitiousness and the goal is to present the material as sucinct as possible.  Whether the reader is a beginner or an expert, there is a ton of information packed in this book that makes the book practical. There is custom source code of scripts that can be used as-is to create and maintain virtualization using VB.  While there is some upfront work and understanding, once things are established it keeps the maintenance and long-term operations easy.  By use of this book I am hoping your own Virtualization needs are met that much faster.  This book will save you 100's of hours of work researching, understanding, experimenting and deciding on a right approach on Virtualization. It will not only help you become an expert on a new technology and tool, but also let you have a stable foundation to work with and expand your career in Virtualization.


### What is covered?
The book covers use of VB under the Debian-based host and guest operating systems. All scripts and examples are based on and tested with Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty Tahr). Most of these are transferable to other Linux host and guest OS.  There may be a few things to consider doing different for Windows OS and Mac OS. 

The emphasis for this book is to have the VirtualBox server running on command-line and hence easily maintainable remotely without the need for GUI, although you may use the GUI as well. The guest OS can be GUI (if that is what you require to Virtualize) as VB provides a remote desktop feature for GUI guests. Most everything in this book is command based management. 

The GUI is not described here as it is essentially quite straight forward to understand and the GUI offers a small subset of VB features. The real power to using and maintaining Virtualization lies in the command-line. If you need more power and would like to do advanced Virtualization automation, you will have to use VB SDK/API programming.  The book does not enter into the VB SDK realm and is limited to command line as most needs can be met using command line. 

So in summary, the book is NOT filled with pages and pages of screen-shots, rather a set of command options and scripts  to maintain a Virtualized infrastructure. You will have script templates to create, clone, backup and manage with automation several VB functions.


### How is this book written?
A lot of thought went into simplifying the reasoning and explanations to what is the ideal amount of detail that a technology enthusiasts would appreciate and be willing to digest. The ideas presented and procedures presented have been well tested and are implementation ready. The goal was to avoid the need to refer additional material except where the reader is compelled to dig much deeper.

With that said, you will find bullet lists spread all around the pages. It was an art to condense explanations where possible to simple bullets which would have otherwise run into pages and pages of rambling. The book _does_ expect you to have some systems administration background to appreciate the concise nature of the book. This approach also turns the book into a very effective reference book. 

For those specific cases requiring very specific options and features that is not presented you will need to refer to the VB online manual (http:_www.virtualbox.org/manual/). However, the books aims to help you understand what features exists so you know to look for the details in the manual. 

All of the script listings are available for download at http:_github.com/snathan9/VirtualBox. The scripts are provided to be run as-is or to modify as desired. If you are in a rush and need to get moving as quickly as you can just run them as they come, or you can modify them to your specific requirements and for a wider understanding. The suggested learning approach is to initially run them one command at a
time, so you understand and observe each step more closely.  Also, the scripts in the book _will_ be revised and made better online as I get feedback or contribution for updates.  A version of the scripts as is presented in the book will be preserved for reference as well.


### Why Focus on Command Line?
Most all books (and blogs) that I came across seem to focus around GUI operation of VB. VirtualBox provides multiple ways to manage Virtual Machines. The most popular is of course the use of GUI client. The GUI client presents an intuitive user friendly way to manage VirtualBox VMs. It is most suitable for those who are just getting started with Virtualization in general or VirtualBox in particular. This is probably the best approach if all you require is a relatively small set of VMs that you plan to run on your laptop. 

However, if you either plan on Virtualizing your entire data center or more than just a few servers, it is well invested to use nothing but "headless" mode for Virtualization. For those of you who are unfamiliar with the term "headless", it is basically running a program without any interface to interact with.  In our case, we lose the VB GUI and run with command-line a.k.a. headless mode. 

Command-line scripting will allow you to clone VMs with just few short key strokes and automate maintenance and documentation of the VMs. In technology terms, scripting is easily scalable to manage your environment as opposed to GUI. Once you get familiar with scripting there is no end of available possibilities. Also the newest features are implemented as command-line mode first before they get implemented on the GUI. The GUI is a very small subset of available options and commands.

Even seasoned admins can get frustrated when learning a new tool. VirtualBox comes with a good set of commands that help you effectively manage your Virtual Machines. With such a rich set of options comes a learning curve and ample opportunities for mistakes. Mistakes, trials and errors can get quite frustrating and the goal is to avoid that frustration and make the experience of using VB pleasurable. 


### How about Web/API interface?
Next to command line, is the Web interface to VirtualBox. VirtualBox has a set of API to control VMs. These can be used to manage the VMs via a Web client. The advantage of a Web client over GUI is the lack of a need to install and maintain a heavy client on the host. Installing thick client on the host means you will also need to install an operating system which has a graphic interface. This makes the host much "heavier" and "complicated" than required. 

If you are virtualizing in a data center, most likely the hosts are themselves remote servers. In that case command-line or web access provides the easiest way to get to the host as opposed to the overly chatty X11 based GUI, for example. The Web client is nice and gives you the status at a glance and/or to make ad-hoc and quick adjustments to the VMs. However when you need to automate changes (such as regularly scheduled snapshots) the command-line offers flexibility and automation.


### Pure scripting API interface
Unlimited power and potential can be had with using a scripting language (such as Python) with VB SDK/API. The API provides features not available in command-line and provides the next level of automation and sophistication.


### What operating systems are covered?
The book covers installing and using VirtualBox on Ubuntu Linux Trusty Tahr. VB works well on all designated operating systems although few features may be different or not implemented.  So most features are transferable to other systems although there may be some nuances to it.


### What else is covered?
The book also goes into some history and explains the different virutalization options available. It helps to understand where you stand in the world of Virtualization. It also helps to position VirtualBox as a viable solution once you understand how the rest of this realm works.  It also helps to clarify some of the myths of virtualization such as the discussion on whether "Type 1" hypervisor is better than "Type 2" for example. 


### Thanks and Acknowledgements
Specific thanks are due to my friends, Rhonda for proof-reading the book and to Yogesh for "test driving" the book on setting my his own VB environment. My son Vidman who is only 8-years old but gives me the support and space to accomplish this writing. 


### Feedback Appreciated
As most authors would, I love to hear from my readers and will take the time to answer questions.  Willing to take suggestions to improve the next edition of the book.  Look for contact link at the end of the book on how to reach me.

